***TRANSCRIPT FOR 46CPRA-CapitalismBuildingBridgesandNeoliberalism_Trim.mp3 ***

 My name is Joanna Quinn and I'm a professor in the Department of Political Science and Director of the Center for Transitional Justice and Post-Conflict Reconstruction at Western University and it's my real pleasure to be able to talk to you today about some of the work that I'm doing. After genocide and other serious human rights violations, people need justice. They may have lost their husbands or daughters, they may have lost their homes, and even if they don't bear the physical scars of war, they bear the psychological scars. But what happens when no one will take those harms seriously? What happens when the rest of society turns its back? My work aims to flip that switch to make society's care. And what I want to talk about for the next few minutes is a relatively new piece building tool that I've been working on. The first stage of that study has just been published in a book called Bynsympathy that's published by the University of Pennsylvania Press. Now, the kind of justice that comes after the most serious crimes is called transitional justice and people like me are interested in confronting the legacies of past human rights abuses and atrocities to build a stable, peaceful, and democratic future as part of a bigger project of peace building, which tries to deal with the many reasons that people fight in the first place and to support societies to manage their differences and conflicts without resorting to violence. Now transitional justice is just one piece of the post-conflict puzzle, and it needs to be carried out along other forms of peace building and development that will make communities whole again. After a peace agreement is signed, transitional governments often put in place mechanisms to allow for justice, whether criminal trials or reparations schemes or even truth and reconciliation commissions like the one we've had here in Canada to deal with the residential school's question. But if people don't know enough about what happened during the conflict, and here I'm talking about outsiders to that conflict, maybe people who live in different regions or people who haven't themselves been affected by it, there's a strong chance that they won't be in favor of the kinds of interventions that people who have been affected most need. Now exactly that happened in Colombia in 2016, when voters went to the polls to legitimize the peace agreement in a plebiscite that would have ended the 52 year conflict between the government and the FARC. The plebiscite posed just one question. Do you support the final agreement to end the conflict and build a stable and lasting peace? As you know in a stunning upset, the no-side prevailed. That plebiscite failed because just over 50% of voters voted against it. Now the result revealed a sharp disconnect between those who had been affected by the conflict and wanted peace and who were willing to settle for less than perfect transitional justice programs to help with their own post-conflict transition and those who had not, many of whom didn't understand the extent to which certain regions of the country had suffered disproportionately from the FARC conflict. The result demonstrated that there was no uniform experience of the long conflict across the country. It also revealed a basic lack of understanding of the experiences of the other. And it was clear from the outcome that people living in one part of Colombia had vastly different concerns from people living in other areas of the country. Now despite their relative proximity, for example, to one of the hardest hit regions, though, the people in the neighboring department rejected the peace agreement altogether. If there had been an appreciation of what people living in the different conflict zones had experienced, though, or what their needs were, would the plebiscite have succeeded? Perhaps. And the thin sympathetic project, my work, is about making those other people care. Now, I've proposed a hypothesis that suggests that the development of even a very rudimentary understanding among individuals from each of the different factions and groups about what has happened, that is the basic facts about the others suffering, could be the necessary condition in promoting not just peaceful coexistence, but society's ability to move forward together. Surprisingly, though, that kind of understanding is too often missing from the post-conflict equation. Getting past that knowledge gap could allow different groups within the population to at least understand why something like transitional justice might be necessary. I want to be clear, though, what I'm proposing is actually far from ideal. In fact, it's the thinnest possible response, the building of basic understanding and basic awareness. And in my view, it's often the best we can hope for, a basic understanding of what others have gone through. I've called this thin sympathy, and I need to stress here that sympathy does not mean I feel sorry for you, but instead I'm using it to refer to recognition that others have experienced deeply traumatic violence and harm. Now as I understand it, interventions to build this kind of understanding can make processes of transitional justice work better. Thin sympathy acts as a kind of lubricant that can make that happen. By giving the population as a whole, a basic understanding about what's happened so that they ultimately understand why transitional justice processes are needed for affected populations. There's often very little political support for things like trials and truth commissions to bring justice to that portion of the population. And instead, people hold tightly to ideas that are simply not true, and nothing gets done. My work is about making those other people care. The first step, and the most important one, is giving them information and details about what has taken place. While that might seem like the easiest thing in the world, when many years of propaganda has told the population that the person on the other side is an animal, or that they've brought the genocide on themselves, it can be an uphill battle. We need to effectively win the hearts and minds of people to change those minds. They need to see that the people on the other side are human beings, just like them, and that they've suffered and need a hand. This can be done through things like student exchanges, or even everyday news broadcasts, updating school curriculum, or even television and radio dramas. But it's important that the information be delivered by a trusted, authoritative source. That same principle is now being used by governments as they try to persuade the Canadian public to get a vaccination against the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Their stars like Ryan Reynolds are being pressed into service to convince people that the vaccination is safe, and that they should get one, too. The same principles of social psychology apply, whether populations are being persuaded to get a vaccine, or to appreciate that their neighbor is a human being, too. But they have to be deliberate interventions that we undertake, because leaving it to chance is too risky. The result of just a basic amount of knowledge about the other can in fact be life-changing. It breaks down biases and stereotypes, and even that small level of knowledge can, through a process called cognitive dissonance that was first outlined by Festinger, cause them to change their minds. The most unexpected thing that I have discovered is that people don't need to be what we might think of as all the way converted as champions for victims of war. It's enough for them to know the basics, so that they'll support the creation of things like trials and truth commissions when the opportunity comes up. That basic amount of knowledge can be enough to ensure that the victims of war and genocide finally get justice. Of course, the more we can get the timing right for these kinds of interventions, the better they will work. It won't come as any surprise, but building this kind of thin sympathetic understanding before a conflict takes place is relatively easy to do. When the risk is low and when they don't feel threatened, people can fairly easily be persuaded about the humanity of the other. Those kinds of upstream efforts are ideal. That's the finding of one part of this study that I carried out with Someral Maasri and Tammy Lambert, and which was published in a book that looked at the preconditions for transitional justice success. We were trying to understand the dynamics that are at play in changing existing structures to make transitional justice more successful. Our book looked at how those contextual factors could be adjusted before processes of transitional justice are established. We concluded that the transitional context could be emeliorated to create the conditions that would produce more robust and sticky results. That is the earlier the better. Building thin sympathy is one of those preconditions, and doing the work of thin sympathy, ahead of other processes, should make those other processes work better. But it often happens that these kinds of interventions get lost in the shuffle, as biases and stereotypes give way to increasing levels of conflict. Still, it's not too late even at that point to attempt to do these things. Downstream interventions, even after conflict has broken out, either during the conflict or after the cessation of conflict, or even as transitional justice processes are rolling out, can also be successful. Thin sympathetic interventions could even be undertaken after a transitional justice mechanism has wrapped up if thin sympathy hasn't been substantiated in the population. And much as it is now being predicted that to be protected from COVID, we're all going to need booster shots over the coming months and years, I think the same is likely to be true of thin sympathetic interventions. It probably needs to be done more than once as a kind of preventative against the recurrence of conflict. The first part of the thin sympathy project was based on more than 20 years of work that I've done in Uganda. And I carried out fieldwork there in 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017 that focused explicitly on understanding the role of thin sympathy and on documenting grassroots efforts to build this kind of understanding. But as a Canadian and in particular as a white settler scholar, I've also been puzzling through whether and how the thin sympathetic hypothesis could also apply here and in other settler colonial contexts where there is no sign of a transition, but where violence and harm structural violence are essentially baked into the system, which was designed as a sort of zero sum game where indigenous people lose and the settlers take all. Now the harms in settler colonial contexts are often quite different from conventional transitions and often include, for example, things like the dispossession of land or the extinguishment of rights pertaining to the use of that land, things like hunting and fishing and being declared extinct as a people. But the radically different treatment of indigenous people living across what we call Canada, for example, remains largely invisible to most other people living in those places. They are able to remain unaware of its destructive tentacles simply because it doesn't apply to them. The thin sympathetic hypothesis and engagement in thin sympathetic activities shows exceptional promise in its ability to break through the silos and stereotypes and it could usefully be employed as part of a broader program of transformation. It seems that thin sympathetic interventions in settler colonial contexts stand to make an even more significant contribution. Now again, thin sympathy involves the deliberate building of understanding, awareness, recognition and appreciation about what has taken place within single communities and in different communities across the country. In other types of conflict and post-conflict settings, overt violence is easy to see and as a result, it's easy to establish the facts of that abuse and to understand what took place. In settler colonial contexts, though, connecting those dots is much harder to do. In both contexts, then, a campaign to build thin sympathy can be an effective part of the piece building toolbox. The benefits of thin sympathy are amplified if that kind of process is undertaken prior to the establishment of any transitional justice process because giving the people the opportunity to know and understand what took place rather than leaving it until after a truth commission has made its final report, for example, can be a useful device that could change the broader social ethos and establish effective preconditions for the ultimate success of those mechanisms even before any kind of mechanisms like this are put in place. Beyond simply causing people to realize their own role in the violence, making such an amendment to their understanding of the social fabric ahead of any transitional justice process, really, I think, stands to give people a reason to participate in the process and to engage in processes of transformation. I'm going to stop there, but before I go, I want to thank the CPRA for the opportunity to tell you a little bit about my work. Thanks so much.


